National Curriculum Framework for School Education
4.4.2.2 Secondary Stage — Science Pedagogy Context
4.6.1 Pedagogy for Science

4.4.2.2 Secondary Stage — Curricular Design Intent

Curricular Goals at the Secondary Stage move from the concrete nature of the Middle Stage
towards abstraction — from perceptual and practical concepts to theoretical concepts. This
abstraction could be in the nature of exploring what cannot be seen or in terms of more abstract
representations (e.g., using a circuit diagram instead of drawing the components of a circuit).
They help students extend their understanding with increasing complexity and abstraction. The
effort is to continue with the concepts discussed in the Middle Stage; a few new concepts are also
introduced. The questions the curriculum must respond to at this Stage are:

a. Is there something happening around us that we cannot directly observe?
b. Why do events and phenomena repeat themselves? What are the general principles that
   govern the world?
c. What are the reasons for the diversity around us?
d. What is the role of Science and Technology in Society?
e. What is the contribution of India to scientific knowledge?
f. How can Science be applied in other areas?
g. What are the connections between other areas and Science?
h. How should Science be practised?
i. What are the scientific values and dispositions that must be developed at this Stage?

At this Stage, essential concepts selected on the basis of these questions include those that help
students develop foundations of key ideas in Science that have wider application (e.g., origin,
properties and propagation of sound introduce students to the idea of waves) and help students
explain processes and materials around them in scientific terms (e.g., nature and properties of
chemical substances used in daily life, work and energy). At this Stage, students must begin to
engage with what they cannot 'see' to provide explanations for what they can observe (e.g.,
atomic structure and valency, cellular processes) and be able to represent the world in scientific
terms, draw inferences, and make predictions (e.g., representation of simple chemical interactions
and changes). They must be able to see scientific patterns and relationships (e.g., Periodic Table,
classification of living organisms) and formalise their observations and understanding in the
form of generalisation and mathematisation (e.g., Newton's laws, Mendel's laws of inheritance,
natural selection and evolution). They must be able to identify and manipulate variables to
develop causal relationships (e.g., manipulation of object and lenses and image characteristics).

Students must develop an interdisciplinary understanding of Science, and its linkages with other
curricular areas, as well as the connection between Science, Technology and Society (e.g., how
literature and art have influenced Science). Students must also understand the contribution of
India to the world's scientific knowledge (e.g., indigenous practices related to health and
medicine).

Students must also be enabled to conduct scientific inquiry independently and connect their
findings to their understanding of scientific concepts, laws, and principles, as well as communicate
their findings in different modes with accuracy and creativity.

4.6.1 Pedagogy for Science

Learning Science involves not just learning theories and facts of Science, but also making
connections between conceptual learning and real life, acquiring the capacities of scientific
inquiry, and most importantly, applying these to understanding the world.

Students like to explore the world around them and understand why and how things happen. In
this process of exploration, they use trial-and-error methods to test their hypotheses and reach
possible conclusions. This exploration need not take place individually — students learn Science
best through engaging with peers and adults.

Students have theories about why things happen, patterns they see around them, and about
cause-and-effect relationships. As they learn about Science in a more formal set-up, these ideas
get tested. Some concepts fit into the students' current understanding, while others require a
shift in thinking. If there is an alignment between current ideas and what is discussed in
classrooms, ideas get strengthened.

At the same time, some concepts do not fit into the students' current thinking. If not addressed,
they can turn into alternative conceptions. For example, heavy objects fall faster, plants are non-
living because they don't move, or heavy/big objects always sink in water. If these ideas are not
challenged and suitably modified through investigation, they can turn into alternative conceptions
which may persist as students move through school.

Apart from these theories, students also bring with them the ability to reason, understand, and
explain relationships between cause and effect. These capacities serve as the basis for developing
scientific reasoning. Opportunities, therefore, to inquire are important, as opposed to being 'told'.
Scientific values, such as honesty and integrity, also develop through 'doing Science'. For example,
while demonstrating an experiment on the boiling point of water, we should write the reading on
the thermometer accurately, even if the water is not boiling at 100 degrees.

The role of the Teacher in aligning pedagogy and assessment with how students learn Science is
critical. Teachers must build an environment that promotes natural curiosity, encourages
questions, gives maximum possible opportunities for hands-on activities, and gives ample space
to discuss ideas. Opportunities for students to express their understanding through different
modes and formative assessments to track growing understanding are also key to learning
Science.

4.6.1.1 Pedagogic Principles

Science pedagogy across stages must be informed by the following principles:

a. Learning Science requires an active engagement of students with the world around them to
   understand it. Science pedagogy achieves this through:
   i.  Simulating the processes of Science such as asking questions, hypothesising, observing,
       testing, finding evidence, collecting data, analysing, modifying conclusions,
       communicating, and re-questioning.
   ii. Exposing students to a variety of aspects of learning Science in varied settings — the
       laboratory, classroom, and field — through approaches such as inquiry, discovery,
       didactic, hands-on Science.
   iii. Encouraging and sustaining curiosity by providing varied experiences that may
        challenge students' existing notions and ideas.

b. Learning Science requires communication and sharing of ideas and observations. Science
   pedagogy achieves this through:
   i.  Using scientific vocabulary during instruction and creating a variety of contexts and
       situations for students to communicate their understanding, ideas, and observations.
   ii. Peer and collaborative learning.

c. Learning Science requires a gradual increase in the capacity to engage with complex and
   abstract ideas, aligned with the cognitive and procedural capacities of students. Science
   pedagogy achieves this by building on students' existing knowledge and using multiple
   representations (mathematical, graphical, diagrammatic, and models).

d. Learning Science requires making linkages between knowledge for the holistic and
   multidisciplinary learning emphasised in NEP 2020. Science pedagogy achieves this
   through:
   i.  Connecting scientific knowledge inside and outside the classroom.
   ii. Horizontal connections with other curricular areas.

e. Learning Science enables the development of certain values, such as collaboration,
   sensitivity, empathy, equality of opportunities, respect for diversity, and other values
   mentioned in NEP 2020. Science pedagogy must facilitate this process.

4.6.1.2 Recommended Pedagogical Approaches and Settings

The same pedagogical approach can be used across the three settings most suitable for learning
Science — the classroom, the field, and the laboratory. The following is a list of considerations
based on which Teachers can choose pedagogical approaches and settings:

a. The nature of a concept should guide the decision regarding the approach and setting.
   For example, speed can be discussed in the playing field, but the structure of a cell
   requires a microscope.
b. The approach and setting chosen should enable the attainment of learning outcomes
   and competencies.
c. Each of the recommended approaches and settings must be selected at least once in an
   academic year, if not more. This will ensure exposure to varied approaches and settings.
d. Even when Teachers choose a didactic approach, areas that students could have
   potentially inquired about or discovered should be highlighted.

a. Hands-on Science
The most important part of learning Science is actually 'doing Science' through hands-on
experiential learning. 'Doing Science' can range from trial and error, using materials around
them, or using basic scientific instruments (measuring instruments), and laboratory apparatus.
In this process, students gain conceptual understanding and develop capacities through
manipulating, designing, and building experiments and demonstrations.

b. Discovery approach
Students explore the natural world following their own interests and discover patterns of
how the world works during their explorations. Teachers may also create opportunities or
draw attention to natural phenomena that students can explore further. Often, this discovery
is followed by other, more structured approaches to ensure learning. For example, the Teacher
draws the attention of the students to changes in the length of the shadows as the day
progresses or to the venation patterns of the leaves of different plants. Students' observations
on shadows are then connected to scientific concepts such as the path of light, and the
venation pattern is connected to the shapes of the leaves.

c. Inquiry approach
The inquiry approach allows students to navigate through unknown questions and explore
solutions on their own. It allows students to work in the same way as scientists. The inquiry
approach engages students with systematic observation, visualising, experimenting, inferring,
communicating, and discovering relations. This approach allows Teachers to choose the
appropriate type of inquiry with respect to the concept and to scaffold (support as per need)
students' learning. For example, students could explore questions such as: How do the image
characteristics vary with the relative position between lens and object? How does the surface
area of the reactants affect the rate of reaction? How does the intensity of light affect the rate
of photosynthesis?

d. Project-centred approach
This approach allows learning within the classroom to continue outside the classroom and
extend over a period of time. For example, observing the changes in the moon over a month
to understand the phases of the moon. In this process, connections to daily life are also made.
The project-centred approach allows students to develop artefacts/products (charts,
presentations, speeches) that reflect and communicate their emerging understanding. It also
allows the integration of concepts across different curricular areas.

e. Didactic approach
Often, teaching Science involves communicating certain important information in the form of
scientific terms, phenomena, and the historical development of concepts and ideas. In this
approach, the Teacher largely regulates the direction and flow of the lesson.

f. Demonstration
The Teacher demonstrates the working of certain instruments or outcomes of experimental
set-ups to draw the attention of the students to relevant concepts. These demonstrations
enrich students' learning experiences of the concepts.

Teacher's Voice 4.6i — Demonstrating Osmosis in Living Cells (Grade 9)
For my Grade 9 students, I planned a demonstration of osmosis in living cells. They already
are familiar with the concept in form of daily life examples such as what causes pruning of
our fingers if kept in water for long, but in this session, we go a level deeper to observe the
process in living cells under the microscope.

We will have a total of 90 minutes to perform this. Hence, I prepare the material such as
common salt (NaCl) solution and cut onion pieces and equipment such as glass slides,
forceps, and microscopes. Students work in multiple groups. Hence, I prepare as many
instruction/observation recording sheets.

On that day, I begin by demonstrating the experiment — I prepare three slides A, B and C,
add drops of solution in varying quantity, place coverslip, and then observe under the
microscope what is happening to the cells in the onion peel on the slide.

Then all groups repeat this same set of actions and record their observation by drawing
on the sheet provided. Post this, we discuss whatever we observed. After the students
discuss possible inferences, I introduce the term 'osmosis' to the class, using the concept
to explain their observations and share more daily life examples where we see this
phenomena — for example, in the process of pickling.
